---
layout: post
title:  "Healthy stretch-marks: The most basic tensions between sales and engineering teams provide valuable signals - why startup leadership should listen very closely."
date:   2015-07-16 04:00:00
---


When I worked in the energy efficiency industry, the CEO for my company had told me a key qualitative indicator he looked at for determining if and how each business unit was growing: the engineering and implementation aka "delivery" teams (those who onboard new paying customers) are complaining they have too much work to do.  If so, this meant sales is selling slightly more deals than the delivery team can keep up with, and of course, this positive signal from the market provides pretty sane justification for continued growth in that unit. Even though software is a much higher leveraged, lower-touch, and different business than building energy efficiency projects, I think the lens of this litmus test has very useful application for software startups as well.  Even though the indicators and their magnitudes may be slightly different, too.  [Note: There are some assumptions I'm baking in here: despite having "too much to do", as is life at a startup, your team is not overworked and on the verge of leaving; and your team is actually capable of delivering the value your backlog of customers think they're signing up and paying for; and, the engineering work you're doing for these customers fits into the product strategy.]  

In software, during healthy growth due to positive market adoption, if sales is able to sell just slightly more business than the delivery team can comfortably keep up with, this is a great sign! This probably looks like a consistent back-log for whoever is doing customer implementations: maybe the VP's Engineering or your first Technical Account Manager.  Your VP Engineering may have been consistently talking about having to take engineers off of core product work and having them work directly with salespeople or account managers to onboard new customers in a timely manner - and of course, this is challenging to an engineering leader.  Your delivery team is developing stretch marks: they are feeling the need to add more resources to help with on-boarding - but it's up to the CEO to ensure the resulting growth is healthy.

At Keen IO, I knew it was a good sign we were growing healthily because when I met with our CTO to plan the on-boarding of new customers, it became increasingly difficult to find time on calendars, due to the other scheduled customer implementations. Whether your delivery team is 1, or 10, this signal is always a very positive indicator that the market still wants more of what you're selling, and there's valid justification for growth.  During this process, your sales and delivery teams are learning how to negotiate and cooperate with each other.  During negotiations, when resources are constrained, priorities from each side will emerge into being more visible, as will power dynamics. 

Reacting to this signal:

For many CEO's, as they recognize this signal, they are ready to pour more time, energy and resources into the revenue generation engines, and as little as other resources needed to support that. And that's generally a healthy business inclination: try to minimize costs to the business for on-boarding new customers, especially expensive time from your software engineering team, while doubling down on a positive reaction from the market. 

But there are some more nuances and traps to be wary of. For example: one of the startups I've been talking to lately is growing m.o.m. revenues at a rate > 10%, is continuing to invest heavily in sales, but their customer delivery team consistently hears customers complain that they aren't getting what sales had promised. There's a perpetual dissonance between sales and engineering. So, while the delivery team has been feeling the growth pain for >6 months now (good signal), and the CEO has reacted to this signal by doubling the size of the sales team (great work), and adding a full-time account manager (awesome), because the people working in customer success in the company are not empowered leaders, nor is the CEO paying close attention to what Customer Success is saying, there's a systemic problem that hasn't been addressed, and a systemic, unhealthy power dynamic. Welcome to #startuplyfe. That's going to happen. But it's a problem that can really only be solved by developing a healthy culture between Sales and Engineering based on mutual respect. This comes from having an empowered leader in your business focusing on Customer Success, as well as a CEO who listens to what Customer Success, Sales, Engineering, and Product is saying.  Without having empowered leadership listening to Customer Success, as well as the other areas of the business, when issues arise between sales and engineering, your account managers, and your customers, will not know up, from down, right, from wrong. What features does your platform really provide?  Did sales over-promise or did engineering under-deliver?  These conflicts will invariably arise, but you need someone to bring them out into the open, make a decision, which will set the tone for the culture and priorities of the company.  Otherwise, you are risk of ending up with a sales-dominated or engineering-dominated workplace, in both cases the customer is the one who suffers.   

Note: If you read SaaStr, Jason Lemkin makes a great point that it's important to hire a Customer Success Manager early on, because, you'll keep the early adopters engaged, and turn them into raving brand advocates - which is critical for word of mouth growth in SaaS.  Jason says that a "pretty good" CSM is better than no CSM, that you can "relax the hiring spec" for a first CSM compared with making your first critical sales hires.  While I unequivocally agree with Jason that hiring someone in this role is better than no one, I am suggesting that that doesn't suffice.  I believe it's critically important to also have the CEO paying very close attention to the signals that come from your customers during implementation, or via your first Customer Success hire; they are closest to the most honest version of your customer, as well as the exchanges between sales & engineering, and can help provide feedback to the product, and your company processes that are critical to learn from.  Without an empowered listener to take action from this feedback, you're wasting one of the most precious information resources you have in the company to learn how to build healthy, scale-able processes and cooperative team dynamics. 






